CalcI Calculus I
Prereq: None
Differentiation and integration of functions of one variable, with applications. Informal treatment of limits and continuity. Differentiation: definition, rules, application to graphing, rates, approximations, and extremum problems. Indefinite integration; separable first-order differential equations. Definite integral; fundamental theorem of calculus. Applications of integration to geometry and science. Elementary functions. Techniques of integration. Polar coordinates. L'Hopital's rule. Improper integrals. Infinite series: geometric, p-harmonic, simple comparison tests, power series for some elementary functions.

CalcII Calculus II
Prereq: CalcI
Calculus of several variables. Vector algebra in 3-space, determinants, matrices. Vector-valued functions of one variable, space motion. Scalar functions of several variables: partial differentiation, gradient, optimization techniques. Double integrals and line integrals in the plane; exact differentials and conservative fields; Green's theorem and applications, triple integrals, line and surface integrals in space, Divergence theorem, Stokes' theorem; applications.

18.05 Introduction to Probability and Statistics
Prereq: CalcII
A unified introduction to probability, Bayesian inference, and frequentist statistics. Topics include: combinatorics, random variables, (joint) distributions, covariance, central limit theorem; Bayesian updating, odds, posterior prediction; significance tests, confidence intervals, bootstrapping, regression. Students also develop computational skills and statistical thinking by using R to simulate, analyze, and visualize data; and by exploring privacy, fairness, and causality in contemporary media and research.

18.06 Linear Algebra
Prereq: CalcII
Basic subject on matrix theory and linear algebra, emphasizing topics useful in other disciplines, including systems of equations, vector spaces, determinants, eigenvalues, singular value decomposition, and positive definite matrices. Applications to least-squares approximations, stability of differential equations, networks, Fourier transforms, and Markov processes. Uses linear algebra software. Compared with 18.700, more emphasis on matrix algorithms and many applications.

6.1000 Introduction to Programming and Computer Science
Prereq: None
Develops foundational skills in programming and in computational modeling. Covers widely used programming concepts in Python, including mutability, function objects, and object-oriented programming. Introduces algorithmic complexity and some common libraries. Throughout, demonstrates using computation to help understand real-world phenomena; topics include optimization problems, building simulations, and statistical modeling.

6.1010 Fundamentals of Programming
Prereq: 6.1000
Introduces fundamental concepts of programming. Designed to develop skills in applying basic methods from programming languages to abstract problems. Topics include programming and Python basics, computational concepts, software engineering, algorithmic techniques, data types, and recursion.  Lab component consists of software design, construction, and implementation of design. Enrollment may be limited.

6.3900 Introduction to Machine Learning
Prereq: 6.1010, 18.06
Introduction to the principles and algorithms of machine learning from an optimization perspective. Topics include linear and non-linear models for supervised, unsupervised, and reinforcement learning, with a focus on gradient-based methods and neural-network architectures. Previous experience with algorithms may be helpful.

6.7960 Deep Learning
Prereq: 18.05, 6.3900
Fundamentals of deep learning, including both theory and applications. Topics include neural net architectures (MLPs, CNNs, RNNs, graph nets, transformers), geometry and invariances in deep learning, backpropagation and automatic differentiation, learning theory and generalization in high-dimensions, and applications to computer vision, natural language processing, and robotics.

6.4300 Introduction to Computer Vision
Prereq: 6.3900, 18.06, 18.05
Provides an introduction to computer vision, covering topics from early vision to mid- and high-level vision, including low-level image analysis, edge detection, image transformations for image synthesis, methods for 3D scene reconstruction, motion analysis and tracking. Additionally, presents basics of machine learning, convolutional neural networks, and transformers in the context of image and video data for object classification, detection, and segmentation.

18.03 Differential Equations
Prereq: CalcII
Study of differential equations, including modeling physical systems. Solution of first-order ODEs by analytical, graphical, and numerical methods. Linear ODEs with constant coefficients. Complex numbers and exponentials. Inhomogeneous equations: polynomial, sinusoidal, and exponential inputs. Oscillations, damping, resonance. Fourier series. Matrices, eigenvalues, eigenvectors, diagonalization. First order linear systems: normal modes, matrix exponentials, variation of parameters. Heat equation, wave equation. Nonlinear autonomous systems: critical point analysis, phase plane diagrams.

6.3000 Signal Processing
Prereq: 6.1000, 18.03
Fundamentals of signal processing, focusing on the use of Fourier methods to analyze and process signals such as sounds and images. Topics include Fourier series, Fourier transforms, the Discrete Fourier Transform, sampling, convolution, deconvolution, filtering, noise reduction, and compression. Applications draw broadly from areas of contemporary interest with emphasis on both analysis and design.

6.8620[J] Spoken Language Processing
Prereq: 6.3000, 6.3900
Introduces the rapidly developing field of spoken language processing including automatic speech recognition. Topics include acoustic theory of speech production, acoustic-phonetics, signal representation, acoustic and language modeling, search, hidden Markov modeling, neural networks models, end-to-end deep learning models, and other machine learning techniques applied to speech and language processing topics. Lecture material intersperses theory with practice. Includes problem sets, laboratory exercises, and open-ended term project.