CalcI Calculus I
Prereq: None
Differentiation and integration of functions of one variable, with applications. Informal treatment of limits and continuity. Differentiation: definition, rules, application to graphing, rates, approximations, and extremum problems. Indefinite integration; separable first-order differential equations. Definite integral; fundamental theorem of calculus. Applications of integration to geometry and science. Elementary functions. Techniques of integration. Polar coordinates. L'Hopital's rule. Improper integrals. Infinite series: geometric, p-harmonic, simple comparison tests, power series for some elementary functions.

CalcII Calculus II
Prereq: CalcI
Calculus of several variables. Vector algebra in 3-space, determinants, matrices. Vector-valued functions of one variable, space motion. Scalar functions of several variables: partial differentiation, gradient, optimization techniques. Double integrals and line integrals in the plane; exact differentials and conservative fields; Green's theorem and applications, triple integrals, line and surface integrals in space, Divergence theorem, Stokes' theorem; applications.

18.03 Differential Equations
Prereq: CalcII
Study of differential equations, including modeling physical systems. Solution of first-order ODEs by analytical, graphical, and numerical methods. Linear ODEs with constant coefficients. Complex numbers and exponentials. Inhomogeneous equations: polynomial, sinusoidal, and exponential inputs. Oscillations, damping, resonance. Fourier series. Matrices, eigenvalues, eigenvectors, diagonalization. First order linear systems: normal modes, matrix exponentials, variation of parameters. Heat equation, wave equation. Nonlinear autonomous systems: critical point analysis, phase plane diagrams.

18.06 Linear Algebra
Prereq: CalcII
Basic subject on matrix theory and linear algebra, emphasizing topics useful in other disciplines, including systems of equations, vector spaces, determinants, eigenvalues, singular value decomposition, and positive definite matrices. Applications to least-squares approximations, stability of differential equations, networks, Fourier transforms, and Markov processes. Uses linear algebra software. Compared with 18.700, more emphasis on matrix algorithms and many applications.

PhysI Physics I
Prereq: None
Introduces classical mechanics. Space and time: straight-line kinematics; motion in a plane; forces and static equilibrium; particle dynamics, with force and conservation of momentum; relative inertial frames and non-inertial force; work, potential energy and conservation of energy; kinetic theory and the ideal gas; rigid bodies and rotational dynamics; vibrational motion; conservation of angular momentum; central force motions; fluid mechanics. Subject taught using the TEAL (Technology-Enabled Active Learning) format which features students working in groups of three, discussing concepts, solving problems, and doing table-top experiments with the aid of computer data acquisition and analysis.

PhysII Physics II
Prereq: CalcI, PhysI
Covers Maxwell's equations in both differential and integral form, electrostatic and magnetic vector potential, and the properties of dielectrics and magnetic materials. Topics include electric charge, Coulomb's law, electrostatic fields and potentials, electric currents, magnetic fields, Ampere's law, Faraday's law of induction, basic electric circuits, and electromagnetic waves. The course utilizes the TEAL (Technology Enabled Active Learning) format for small group interactions and practical experiments in electricity and magnetism. Some knowledge of vector calculus is assumed.

6.3100 Dynamical System Modeling and Control Design
Prereq: PhysII, 18.06
A learn-by-design introduction to modeling and control of discrete- and continuous-time systems, from intuition-building analytical techniques to more computational and data-centric strategies. Topics include: linear difference/differential equations (natural frequencies, transfer functions); controller metrics (stability, tracking, disturbance rejection); analytical techniques (PID, root-loci, lead-lag, phase margin); computational strategies (state-space, eigen-placement, LQR); and data-centric approaches (state estimation, regression, and identification). Concepts are introduced with lectures and online problems, and then mastered during weekly labs. In lab, students model, design, test, and explain systems and controllers involving sensors, actuators, and a microcontroller (e.g., optimizing thrust-driven positioners or stabilizing magnetic levitators).

6.7100[J] Dynamic Systems and Control
Prereq: 6.3100
Linear, discrete- and continuous-time, multi-input-output systems in control, related areas. Least squares and matrix perturbation problems. State-space models, modes, stability, controllability, observability, transfer function matrices, poles and zeros, and minimality. Internal stability of interconnected systems, feedback compensators, state feedback, optimal regulation, observers, and observer-based compensators. Measures of control performance, robustness issues using singular values of transfer functions. Introductory ideas on nonlinear systems.

6.3700 Introduction to Probability
Prereq: CalcII
An introduction to probability theory, the modeling and analysis of probabilistic systems, and elements of statistical inference. Probabilistic models, conditional probability. Discrete and continuous random variables. Expectation and conditional expectation, and further topics about random variables. Limit Theorems. Bayesian estimation and hypothesis testing. Elements of classical statistical inference. Bernoulli and Poisson processes. Markov chains. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments.

6.3260[J] Networks
Prereq: 6.3700
Highlights common principles that permeate the functioning of diverse technological, economic and social networks. Utilizes three sets of tools for analyzing networks -- random graph models, optimization, and game theory -- to study informational and learning cascades; economic and financial networks; social influence networks; formation of social groups; communication networks and the Internet; consensus and gossiping; spread and control of epidemics; control and use of energy networks; and biological networks. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments.

1.208 Resilient Networks
Prereq: 6.3700
Network and combinatorial optimization methods and game-theoretic modeling for resilience of large-scale networks against disruptions, both random and adversarial. Topics include network resilience metrics, interdiction and security games, strategic resource allocation and network design, cascades in networks, routing games and network equilibrium models, reliability and security assessment of networked systems, and incentive problems in network security. Applications to transportation, logistics, supply chain, communication, and electric power systems.

6.7210[J] Introduction to Mathematical Programming
Prereq: 18.06
Introduction to linear optimization and its extensions emphasizing both methodology and the underlying mathematical structures and geometrical ideas. Covers classical theory of linear programming as well as some recent advances in the field. Topics: simplex method; duality theory; sensitivity analysis; network flow problems; decomposition; robust optimization; integer programming; interior point algorithms for linear programming; and introduction to combinatorial optimization and NP-completeness.

15.095 Machine Learning Under a Modern Optimization Lens
Prereq: 6.7210[J]
Develops algorithms for central problems in machine learning from a modern optimization perspective. Topics include sparse, convex, robust and median regression; an algorithmic framework for regression; optimal classification and regression trees, and their relationship with neural networks; how to transform predictive algorithms to prescriptive algorithms; optimal prescriptive trees; and robust classification.  Also covers design of experiments, missing data imputations, mixture of Gaussian models, exact bootstrap, and sparse matrix estimation, including principal component analysis, factor analysis, inverse co-variance matrix estimation, and matrix completion.

6.1000 Introduction to Programming and Computer Science
Prereq: None
Develops foundational skills in programming and in computational modeling. Covers widely used programming concepts in Python, including mutability, function objects, and object-oriented programming. Introduces algorithmic complexity and some common libraries. Throughout, demonstrates using computation to help understand real-world phenomena; topics include optimization problems, building simulations, and statistical modeling.

6.1903 Introduction to Low-level Programming in C and Assembly
Prereq: 6.1000
Introduction to C and assembly language for students coming from a Python background (6.1000). Studies the C language, focusing on memory and associated topics including pointers, how different data structures are stored in memory, the stack, and the heap in order to build a strong understanding of the constraints involved in manipulating complex data structures in modern computational systems. Studies assembly language to facilitate a firm understanding of how high-level languages are translated to machine-level instructions.

6.1910 Computation Structures
Prereq: PhysII, 6.1000, 6.1903
Provides an introduction to the design of digital systems and computer architecture. Emphasizes expressing all hardware designs in a high-level hardware description language and synthesizing the designs. Topics include combinational and sequential circuits, instruction set abstraction for programmable hardware, single-cycle and pipelined processor implementations, multi-level memory hierarchies, virtual memory, exceptions and I/O, and parallel systems.

6.1800 Computer Systems Engineering
Prereq: 6.1910
Topics on the engineering of computer software and hardware systems: techniques for controlling complexity; strong modularity using client-server design, operating systems; performance, networks; naming; security and privacy; fault-tolerant systems, atomicity and coordination of concurrent activities, and recovery; impact of computer systems on society. Case studies of working systems and readings from the current literature provide comparisons and contrasts. Includes a single, semester-long design project. Students engage in extensive written communication exercises. Enrollment may be limited.

6.1820[J] Mobile and Sensor Computing
Prereq: 6.1800
Focuses on "Internet of Things" (IoT) systems and technologies, sensing, computing, and communication. Explores fundamental design and implementation issues in the engineering of mobile and sensor computing systems. Topics include battery-free sensors, seeing through wall, robotic sensors, vital sign sensors (breathing, heartbeats, emotions), sensing in cars and autonomous vehicles, subsea IoT, sensor security, positioning technologies (including GPS and indoor WiFi), inertial sensing (accelerometers, gyroscopes, inertial measurement units, dead-reckoning), embedded and distributed system architectures, sensing with radio signals, sensing with microphones and cameras, wireless sensor networks, embedded and distributed system architectures, mobile libraries and APIs to sensors, and application case studies. Includes readings from research literature, as well as laboratory assignments and a significant term project.

2.003[J] Dynamics and Control I
Prereq: PhysII, 18.03
Introduction to the dynamics and vibrations of lumped-parameter models of mechanical systems. Kinematics. Force-momentum formulation for systems of particles and rigid bodies in planar motion. Work-energy concepts. Virtual displacements and virtual work. Lagrange's equations for systems of particles and rigid bodies in planar motion. Linearization of equations of motion. Linear stability analysis of mechanical systems. Free and forced vibration of linear multi-degree of freedom models of mechanical systems; matrix eigenvalue problems.

2.004 Dynamics and Control II
Prereq: 2.003[J]
Modeling, analysis, and control of dynamic systems. System modeling: lumped parameter models of mechanical, electrical, and electromechanical systems; interconnection laws; actuators and sensors. Linear systems theory: linear algebra; Laplace transform; transfer functions, time response and frequency response, poles and zeros; block diagrams; solutions via analytical and numerical techniques; stability. Introduction to feedback control: closed-loop response; PID compensation; steady-state characteristics, root-locus design concepts, frequency-domain design concepts. Laboratory experiments and control design projects. 

2.151 Advanced System Dynamics and Control
Prereq: 2.004, 18.06
Analytical descriptions of state-determined dynamic physical systems; time and frequency domain representations; system characteristics - controllability, observability, stability; linear and nonlinear system responses. Modification of system characteristics using feedback. State observers, Kalman filters. Modeling/performance trade-offs in control system design. Basic optimization tools. Positive systems. Emphasizes applications to physical systems.

2.160 Identification, Estimation, and Learning
Prereq: 2.151
Provides a broad theoretical basis for estimation, identification, and learning of linear and nonlinear systems at the cross-disciplinary area of system dynamics and control, machine learning, and statistics. Recursive least squares estimate, partial least squares, Kalman filter and extended Kalman filter, Bayes filter and particle filter; parametric and non-parametric system identification, Wiener-Hopf equation, persistent excitation, unbiased estimates, asymptotic variance, experiment design; function approximation theory, neural nets, radial basis functions, Koopman operator for exact linearization of nonlinear systems, and dynamic mode decomposition. Context-oriented mini-projects: robotics, self-driving cars, biomedical engineering, wearable sensors.

2.152[J] Nonlinear Control
Prereq: 2.151
Introduction to nonlinear control and estimation in physical and biological systems. Nonlinear stability theory, Lyapunov analysis, Barbalat's lemma. Feedback linearization, differential flatness, internal dynamics. Sliding surfaces. Adaptive nonlinear control and estimation. Multiresolution bases, nonlinear system identification. Contraction analysis, differential stability theory. Nonlinear observers. Asynchronous distributed computation and learning. Concurrent synchronization, polyrhythms. Monotone nonlinear systems. Emphasizes application to physical systems (robots, aircraft, spacecraft, underwater vehicles, reaction-diffusion processes, machine vision, oscillators, internet), machine learning, computational neuroscience, and systems biology. Includes term projects.

16.332 Formal Methods for Safe Autonomous Systems
Prereq: ?
Covers formal methods for designing and analyzing autonomous systems. Focuses on both classical and state-of-the-art rigorous methods for specifying, modeling, verifying, and synthesizing various behaviors for systems where embedded computing units monitor and control physical processes. Additionally, covers advanced material on combining formal methods with control theory and machine learning theory for modern safety critical autonomous systems powered by AI techniques such as robots, self-driving cars, and drones. Strong emphasis on the use of various mathematical and software tools to provide safety, soundness, and completeness guarantees for system models with different levels of fidelity.