CalcI Calculus I
Prereq: None
Differentiation and integration of functions of one variable, with applications. Informal treatment of limits and continuity. Differentiation: definition, rules, application to graphing, rates, approximations, and extremum problems. Indefinite integration; separable first-order differential equations. Definite integral; fundamental theorem of calculus. Applications of integration to geometry and science. Elementary functions. Techniques of integration. Polar coordinates. L'Hopital's rule. Improper integrals. Infinite series: geometric, p-harmonic, simple comparison tests, power series for some elementary functions.

CalcII Calculus II
Prereq: CalcI
Calculus of several variables. Vector algebra in 3-space, determinants, matrices. Vector-valued functions of one variable, space motion. Scalar functions of several variables: partial differentiation, gradient, optimization techniques. Double integrals and line integrals in the plane; exact differentials and conservative fields; Green's theorem and applications, triple integrals, line and surface integrals in space, Divergence theorem, Stokes' theorem; applications.

PhysI Physics I
Prereq: None
Introduces classical mechanics. Space and time: straight-line kinematics; motion in a plane; forces and static equilibrium; particle dynamics, with force and conservation of momentum; relative inertial frames and non-inertial force; work, potential energy and conservation of energy; kinetic theory and the ideal gas; rigid bodies and rotational dynamics; vibrational motion; conservation of angular momentum; central force motions; fluid mechanics. Subject taught using the TEAL (Technology-Enabled Active Learning) format which features students working in groups of three, discussing concepts, solving problems, and doing table-top experiments with the aid of computer data acquisition and analysis.

PhysII Physics II
Prereq: CalcI, PhysI
Covers Maxwell's equations in both differential and integral form, electrostatic and magnetic vector potential, and the properties of dielectrics and magnetic materials. Topics include electric charge, Coulomb's law, electrostatic fields and potentials, electric currents, magnetic fields, Ampere's law, Faraday's law of induction, basic electric circuits, and electromagnetic waves. The course utilizes the TEAL (Technology Enabled Active Learning) format for small group interactions and practical experiments in electricity and magnetism. Some knowledge of vector calculus is assumed.

18.06 Linear Algebra
Prereq: CalcII
Basic subject on matrix theory and linear algebra, emphasizing topics useful in other disciplines, including systems of equations, vector spaces, determinants, eigenvalues, singular value decomposition, and positive definite matrices. Applications to least-squares approximations, stability of differential equations, networks, Fourier transforms, and Markov processes. Uses linear algebra software. Compared with 18.700, more emphasis on matrix algorithms and many applications.

6.3100 Dynamical System Modeling and Control Design
Prereq: PhysII, 18.06
A learn-by-design introduction to modeling and control of discrete- and continuous-time systems, from intuition-building analytical techniques to more computational and data-centric strategies. Topics include: linear difference/differential equations (natural frequencies, transfer functions); controller metrics (stability, tracking, disturbance rejection); analytical techniques (PID, root-loci, lead-lag, phase margin); computational strategies (state-space, eigen-placement, LQR); and data-centric approaches (state estimation, regression, and identification). Concepts are introduced with lectures and online problems, and then mastered during weekly labs. In lab, students model, design, test, and explain systems and controllers involving sensors, actuators, and a microcontroller (e.g., optimizing thrust-driven positioners or stabilizing magnetic levitators).

6.7100[J] Dynamic Systems and Control
Prereq: 6.3100
Linear, discrete- and continuous-time, multi-input-output systems in control, related areas. Least squares and matrix perturbation problems. State-space models, modes, stability, controllability, observability, transfer function matrices, poles and zeros, and minimality. Internal stability of interconnected systems, feedback compensators, state feedback, optimal regulation, observers, and observer-based compensators. Measures of control performance, robustness issues using singular values of transfer functions. Introductory ideas on nonlinear systems.

2.160 Identification, Estimation, and Learning
Prereq: 6.7100[J]
Provides a broad theoretical basis for estimation, identification, and learning of linear and nonlinear systems at the cross-disciplinary area of system dynamics and control, machine learning, and statistics. Recursive least squares estimate, partial least squares, Kalman filter and extended Kalman filter, Bayes filter and particle filter; parametric and non-parametric system identification, Wiener-Hopf equation, persistent excitation, unbiased estimates, asymptotic variance, experiment design; function approximation theory, neural nets, radial basis functions, Koopman operator for exact linearization of nonlinear systems, and dynamic mode decomposition. Context-oriented mini-projects: robotics, self-driving cars, biomedical engineering, wearable sensors.

6.3700 Introduction to Probability
Prereq: CalcII
An introduction to probability theory, the modeling and analysis of probabilistic systems, and elements of statistical inference. Probabilistic models, conditional probability. Discrete and continuous random variables. Expectation and conditional expectation, and further topics about random variables. Limit Theorems. Bayesian estimation and hypothesis testing. Elements of classical statistical inference. Bernoulli and Poisson processes. Markov chains. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments.

6.3260[J] Networks
Prereq: 6.3700
Highlights common principles that permeate the functioning of diverse technological, economic and social networks. Utilizes three sets of tools for analyzing networks -- random graph models, optimization, and game theory -- to study informational and learning cascades; economic and financial networks; social influence networks; formation of social groups; communication networks and the Internet; consensus and gossiping; spread and control of epidemics; control and use of energy networks; and biological networks. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments.

18.06 Linear Algebra
Prereq: CalcII
Basic subject on matrix theory and linear algebra, emphasizing topics useful in other disciplines, including systems of equations, vector spaces, determinants, eigenvalues, singular value decomposition, and positive definite matrices. Applications to least-squares approximations, stability of differential equations, networks, Fourier transforms, and Markov processes. Uses linear algebra software. Compared with 18.700, more emphasis on matrix algorithms and many applications.

6.7210[J] Introduction to Mathematical Programming
Prereq: 18.06
Introduction to linear optimization and its extensions emphasizing both methodology and the underlying mathematical structures and geometrical ideas. Covers classical theory of linear programming as well as some recent advances in the field. Topics: simplex method; duality theory; sensitivity analysis; network flow problems; decomposition; robust optimization; integer programming; interior point algorithms for linear programming; and introduction to combinatorial optimization and NP-completeness.

15.095 Machine Learning Under a Modern Optimization Lens
Prereq: 6.7210[J]
Develops algorithms for central problems in machine learning from a modern optimization perspective. Topics include sparse, convex, robust and median regression; an algorithmic framework for regression; optimal classification and regression trees, and their relationship with neural networks; how to transform predictive algorithms to prescriptive algorithms; optimal prescriptive trees; and robust classification.  Also covers design of experiments, missing data imputations, mixture of Gaussian models, exact bootstrap, and sparse matrix estimation, including principal component analysis, factor analysis, inverse co-variance matrix estimation, and matrix completion.

16.332 Formal Methods for Safe Autonomous Systems
Prereq: ?
Covers formal methods for designing and analyzing autonomous systems. Focuses on both classical and state-of-the-art rigorous methods for specifying, modeling, verifying, and synthesizing various behaviors for systems where embedded computing units monitor and control physical processes. Additionally, covers advanced material on combining formal methods with control theory and machine learning theory for modern safety critical autonomous systems powered by AI techniques such as robots, self-driving cars, and drones. Strong emphasis on the use of various mathematical and software tools to provide safety, soundness, and completeness guarantees for system models with different levels of fidelity.