CalcI Calculus I
Prereq: None
Differentiation and integration of functions of one variable, with applications. Informal treatment of limits and continuity. Differentiation: definition, rules, application to graphing, rates, approximations, and extremum problems. Indefinite integration; separable first-order differential equations. Definite integral; fundamental theorem of calculus. Applications of integration to geometry and science. Elementary functions. Techniques of integration. Polar coordinates. L'Hopital's rule. Improper integrals. Infinite series: geometric, p-harmonic, simple comparison tests, power series for some elementary functions.

CalcII Calculus II
Prereq: CalcI
Calculus of several variables. Vector algebra in 3-space, determinants, matrices. Vector-valued functions of one variable, space motion. Scalar functions of several variables: partial differentiation, gradient, optimization techniques. Double integrals and line integrals in the plane; exact differentials and conservative fields; Green's theorem and applications, triple integrals, line and surface integrals in space, Divergence theorem, Stokes' theorem; applications.

18.06 Linear Algebra
Prereq: CalcII
Basic subject on matrix theory and linear algebra, emphasizing topics useful in other disciplines, including systems of equations, vector spaces, determinants, eigenvalues, singular value decomposition, and positive definite matrices. Applications to least-squares approximations, stability of differential equations, networks, Fourier transforms, and Markov processes. Uses linear algebra software. Compared with 18.700, more emphasis on matrix algorithms and many applications.

15.066[J] System Optimization and Analysis for Operations
Prereq: CalcII
Introduction to mathematical modeling, optimization, and simulation, as applied to manufacturing and operations. Specific methods include linear programming, network flow problems, integer and nonlinear programming, discrete-event simulation, heuristics and computer applications for manufacturing processes, operations and systems.

6.3700 Introduction to Probability
Prereq: CalcII
An introduction to probability theory, the modeling and analysis of probabilistic systems, and elements of statistical inference. Probabilistic models, conditional probability. Discrete and continuous random variables. Expectation and conditional expectation, and further topics about random variables. Limit Theorems. Bayesian estimation and hypothesis testing. Elements of classical statistical inference. Bernoulli and Poisson processes. Markov chains.

6.7710 Discrete Stochastic Processes
Prereq: 6.3700
Review of probability and laws of large numbers; Poisson counting process and renewal processes; Markov chains (including Markov decision theory), branching processes, birth-death processes, and semi-Markov processes; continuous-time Markov chains and reversibility; random walks, martingales, and large deviations; applications from queueing, communication, control, and operations research.

6.1000 Introduction to Programming and Computer Science
Prereq: None
Develops foundational skills in programming and in computational modeling. Covers widely used programming concepts in Python, including mutability, function objects, and object-oriented programming. Introduces algorithmic complexity and some common libraries. Throughout, demonstrates using computation to help understand real-world phenomena; topics include optimization problems, building simulations, and statistical modeling.

15.053 Optimization Methods in Business Analytics
Prereq: 6.1000
Introduces optimization methods with a focus on modeling, solution techniques, and analysis. Covers linear programming, network optimization, integer programming, nonlinear programming, and heuristics. Applications to logistics, manufacturing, statistics, machine learning, transportation, game theory, marketing, project management, and finance. Includes projects in which student teams solve optimization problems of practical interest.

6.7210[J] Introduction to Mathematical Programming
Prereq: 18.06
Introduction to linear optimization and its extensions emphasizing both methodology and the underlying mathematical structures and geometrical ideas. Covers classical theory of linear programming as well as some recent advances in the field. Topics: simplex method; duality theory; sensitivity analysis; network flow problems; decomposition; robust optimization; integer programming; interior point algorithms for linear programming; and introduction to combinatorial optimization and NP-completeness.

15.083 Integer Optimization
Prereq: 6.7210[J]
In-depth treatment of mixed-integer optimization. Topics include modeling techniques, combinatorial optimization, ideal formulations, cutting plane methods, branching algorithms, row generation algorithms, column generation algorithms, heuristic algorithms, and mixed-integer non-linear optimization. Instruction provided in modeling complex problems arising in practice; understanding the theory of integer optimization; knowing the core technologies employed within modern solvers; and developing algorithms to solve large-scale problems for which off-the-shelf solvers may not be sufficient. Examples drawn from a broad range of industries, such as transportation, energy, telecommunications, finance, product design, sports, and social networks. Includes a term project.