6.2000 Electrical Circuits: Modeling and Design of Physical Systems
Prereq: PhysII
Fundamentals of linear systems, and abstraction modeling of multi-physics lumped and distributed systems using lumped electrical circuits. Linear networks involving independent and dependent sources, resistors, capacitors, and inductors. Extensions to include operational amplifiers and transducers. Dynamics of first- and second-order networks; analysis and design in the time and frequency domains; signal and energy processing applications. Design exercises. Weekly laboratory with microcontroller and transducers.

6.2020[J] Electronics Project Laboratory
Prereq: None
Intuition-based introduction to electronics, electronic components, and test equipment such as oscilloscopes, multimeters, and signal generators. Key components studied and used are op-amps, comparators, bi-polar transistors, and diodes (including LEDs). Students design, build, and debug small electronics projects (often featuring sound and light) to put their new knowledge into practice. Upon completing the class, students can take home a kit of components. Intended for students with little or no previous background in electronics. Enrollment may be limited.

6.2030 Electronics First Laboratory
Prereq: PhysII
Practical introduction to the design and construction of electronic circuits for information processing and control. Laboratory exercises include activities such as the construction of oscillators for a simple musical instrument, a laser audio communicator, a countdown timer, an audio amplifier, and a feedback-controlled solid-state lighting system for daylight energy conservation. Introduces basic electrical components including resistors, capacitors, and inductors; basic assembly techniques for electronics include breadboarding and soldering; and programmable system-on-chip electronics and C programming language. Enrollment limited.

6.2040 Analog Electronics Laboratory
Prereq: 6.2000
Experimental laboratory explores the design, construction, and debugging of analog electronic circuits. Lectures and laboratory projects in the first half of the course investigate the performance characteristics of semiconductor devices (diodes, BJTs, and MOSFETs) and functional analog building blocks, including single-stage amplifiers, op amps, small audio amplifier, filters, converters, sensor circuits, and medical electronics (ECG, pulse-oximetry). Projects involve design, implementation, and presentation in an environment similar to that of industry engineering design teams. Instruction and practice in written and oral communication provided. Opportunity to simulate real-world problems and solutions that involve tradeoffs and the use of engineering judgment.

6.2050 Digital Systems Laboratory
Prereq: 6.1910
Lab-intensive subject that investigates digital systems with a focus on FPGAs. Lectures and labs cover logic, flip flops, counters, timing, synchronization, finite-state machines, digital signal processing, communication protocols, and modern sensors. Prepares students for the design and implementation of a large-scale final project of their choice: games, music, digital filters, wireless communications, video, or graphics. Extensive use of System/Verilog for describing and implementing and verifying digital logic designs.

6.2060 Microcomputer Project Laboratory
Prereq: 6.2000
Introduces analysis and design of embedded systems. Microcontrollers provide adaptation, flexibility, and real-time control. Emphasizes construction of complete systems, including a five-axis robot arm, a fluorescent lamp ballast, a tomographic imaging station (e.g., a CAT scan), and a simple calculator. Presents a wide range of basic tools, including software and development tools, programmable system on chip, peripheral components such as A/D converters, communication schemes, signal processing techniques, closed-loop digital feedback control, interface and power electronics, and modeling of electromechanical systems. Includes a sequence of assigned projects, followed by a final project of the student's choice, emphasizing creativity and uniqueness. Provides instruction in written and oral communication. To satisfy the independent inquiry component of this subject, students expand the scope of their laboratory project.

6.2080 Semiconductor Electronic Circuits
Prereq: 6.2000
Provides an introduction to basic circuit design, starting from basic semiconductor devices such as diodes and transistors, large and small signal models and analysis, to circuits such as basic amplifier and opamp circuits. Labs give students access to CAD/EDA tools to design, analyze, and layout analog circuits. At the end of the term, students have their chip design fabricated using a 22nm FinFET CMOS process.

6.2090 Solid-State Circuits
Prereq: 6.2080
Fosters deep understanding and intuition that is crucial in innovating analog circuits and optimizing the whole system in bipolar junction transistor (BJT) and metal oxide semiconductor (MOS) technologies. Covers both theory and real-world applications of basic amplifier structures, operational amplifiers, temperature sensors, bandgap references. Covers topics such as noise, linearity and stability. Homework and labs give students access to CAD/EDA tools to design and analyze analog circuits. Provides practical experience through lab exercises, including a broadband amplifier design and characterization. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments.

6.6000 CMOS Analog and Mixed-Signal Circuit Design
Prereq: 6.2090
A detailed exposition of the principles involved in designing and optimizing analog and mixed-signal circuits in CMOS technologies. Small-signal and large-signal models. Systemic methodology for device sizing and biasing. Basic circuit building blocks. Operational amplifier design. Principles of switched capacitor networks including switched-capacitor and continuous-time integrated filters. Basic and advanced A/D and D/A converters, delta-sigma modulators, RF and other signal processing circuits. Design projects on op amps and subsystems are a required part of the subject.

6.6010 Analysis and Design of Digital Integrated Circuits
Prereq: 6.1910, 6.2500
Device and circuit level optimization of digital building blocks. Circuit design styles for logic, arithmetic, and sequential blocks. Estimation and minimization of energy consumption. Interconnect models and parasitics, device sizing and logical effort, timing issues (clock skew and jitter), and active clock distribution techniques. Memory architectures, circuits (sense amplifiers), and devices. Evaluation of how design choices affect tradeoffs across key metrics including energy consumption, speed, robustness, and cost. Extensive use of modern design flow and EDA/CAD tools for the analysis and design of digital building blocks and digital VLSI design for labs and design projects

6.6020 High-Frequency Integrated Circuits
Prereq: 6.2080
Principles and techniques of high-speed integrated circuits used in wireless/wireline data links and remote sensing. On-chip passive component design of inductors, capacitors, and antennas. Analysis of distributed effects, such as transmission line modeling, S-parameters, and Smith chart. Transceiver architectures and circuit blocks, which include low-noise amplifiers, mixers, voltage-controlled oscillators, power amplifiers, and frequency dividers. Involves IC/EM simulation and laboratory projects.