6.3900 Introduction to Machine Learning
Prereq: 6.1210, 18.06
Introduction to the principles and algorithms of machine learning from an optimization perspective. Topics include linear and non-linear models for supervised, unsupervised, and reinforcement learning, with a focus on gradient-based methods and neural-network architectures. Previous experience with algorithms may be helpful.

6.3950 AI, Decision Making, and Society
Prereq: 6.3700
Introduction to fundamentals of modern data-driven decision-making frameworks, such as causal inference and hypothesis testing in statistics as well as supervised and reinforcement learning in machine learning. Explores how these frameworks are being applied in various societal contexts, including criminal justice, healthcare, finance, and social media. Emphasis on pinpointing the non-obvious interactions, undesirable feedback loops, and unintended consequences that arise in such settings. Enables students to develop their own principled perspective on the interface of data-driven decision making and society. Students taking graduate version complete additional assignments.

6.7900 Machine Learning
Prereq: 6.3900, 6.3800
Principles, techniques, and algorithms in machine learning from the point of view of statistical inference; representation, generalization, and model selection; and methods such as linear/additive models, active learning, boosting, support vector machines, non-parametric Bayesian methods, hidden Markov models, Bayesian networks, and convolutional and recurrent neural networks.

6.7910[J] Statistical Learning Theory and Applications
Prereq: 6.7900
Covers foundations and recent advances in statistical machine learning theory, with the dual goals of providing students with the theoretical knowledge to use machine learning and preparing more advanced students to contribute to progress in the field. The content is roughly divided into three parts. The first part is about classical regularization, margin, stochastic gradient methods, overparametrization, implicit regularization, and stability. The second part is about deep networks: approximation and optimization theory plus roots of generalization. The third part is about the connections between learning theory and the brain. Occasional talks by leading researchers on advanced research topics. Emphasis on current research topics.

6.7920[J] Reinforcement Learning: Foundations and Methods
Prereq: 6.3700
Examines reinforcement learning (RL) as a methodology for approximately solving sequential decision-making under uncertainty, with foundations in optimal control and machine learning. Provides a mathematical introduction to RL, including dynamic programming, statistical, and empirical perspectives, and special topics. Core topics include: dynamic programming, special structures, finite and infinite horizon Markov Decision Processes, value and policy iteration, Monte Carlo methods, temporal differences, Q-learning, stochastic approximation, and bandits. Also covers approximate dynamic programming, including value-based methods and policy space methods. Applications and examples drawn from diverse domains. Focus is mathematical, but is supplemented with computational exercises. An analysis prerequisite is suggested but not required; mathematical maturity is necessary.

6.7930[J] Machine Learning for Healthcare
Prereq: 6.7900
Introduces students to machine learning in healthcare, including the nature of clinical data and the use of machine learning for risk stratification, disease progression modeling, precision medicine, diagnosis, subtype discovery, and improving clinical workflows. Topics include causality, interpretability, algorithmic fairness, time-series analysis, graphical models, deep learning and transfer learning. Guest lectures by clinicians from the Boston area, and projects with real clinical data, emphasize subtleties of working with clinical data and translating machine learning into clinical practice. Limited to 55.

6.7940 Dynamic Programming and Reinforcement Learning
Prereq: 6.3700
Dynamic programming as a unifying framework for sequential decision-making under uncertainty, Markov decision problems, and stochastic control. Perfect and imperfect state information models. Finite horizon and infinite horizon problems, including discounted and average cost formulations. Value and policy iteration. Suboptimal methods. Approximate dynamic programming for large-scale problems, and reinforcement learning. Applications and examples drawn from diverse domains. While an analysis prerequisite is not required, mathematical maturity is necessary.

6.7960 Deep Learning
Prereq: 18.05, 6.3900
Fundamentals of deep learning, including both theory and applications. Topics include neural net architectures (MLPs, CNNs, RNNs, graph nets, transformers), geometry and invariances in deep learning, backpropagation and automatic differentiation, learning theory and generalization in high-dimensions, and applications to computer vision, natural language processing, and robotics.